regex-tutorial.md, before:

# Regular Expression Breakdown

This tutorial/breakdown will be a clear and concise guide to regular expressions, commonly known as 'Regex'. Regex is an essential tool when dealing with processing text, As a fundamental resource, regex enables developers to retrieve, modify and manipulate data within strings.

This Gist serves as a straight to the point breakdown to explain the idea behind regex.

## Summary

The Regex that I will be using for my breakdown will be the following: `/^(https?:\/\/)?([\da-z\.-]+)\.([a-z\.]{2,6})([\/\w \.-]*)*\/?$/`

The above regex can be used to match with a URL, a couple example URL's that match with the regex provided are: https://www.example.com/path/to/resource | http://subdomain.domain.co.uk/page1/page2

Do note that each description of the components will contain a code snippet, this is to demonstrate how each specific regex component can match with specific URL's. I will also be providing a console log which uses the regex test method after each code snippet which shows a boolean value of true highlighting if there is a match.

## Table of Contents

- [Anchors](#anchors)
- [Quantifiers](#quantifiers)
- [Grouping Constructs](#grouping-constructs)
- [Bracket Expressions](#bracket-expressions)
- [Character Classes](#character-classes)
- [The OR Operator](#the-or-operator)
- [Flags](#flags)
- [Character Escapes](#character-escapes)

## Regex Components

### Anchors

- `^` : The caret anchor represents the start of a line
- `$` : The dollar sign represents the end of a line

The below code snippet shows the `^` at the start of the expression and the `$` at the end

```javascript
const regexAnchors = /^https?:\/\/example\.com$/;
const urlAnchors = 'https://example.com';
console.log(regexAnchors.test(urlAnchors)); // Expected output: true
```

### Quantifiers

- `?` : The question mark means 0 or 1 of the preceeding element. It makes the preceeding element optional.
- `+` : The plus sign indicates that the preceeding element can occur one or more times.
- `*` : The asterisk indicates that the preceeding element can occur 0 or more times

The below code snippet utilises the ?, +, and the \* Quantifiers, it also shows the string/URL that the regex matches with.

```javascript
const regexQuantifiers = /^https?:\/\/([\w-]+\.)+[\w]{2,}(\/[\w-./?%&=]*)?$/;
const urlQuantifiers =
  'https://www.example.com/path/to/resource?param1=value1&param2=value2';
console.log(regexQuantifiers.test(urlQuantifiers)); // Expected output: true
```

### Grouping Constructs

- `(...)` : The grouping constructs are defined by parenthesis and it denotes the beginning and end of a capturing group. These allow you to extract specific information from text efficiently.

The below code snippet shows 3 grouping constructs for the url https://www.example.com

```javascript
const regexGroupConstructs = /^(https?):\/\/(www\.)?(example\.com)$/;
const urlGrouping = 'https://www.example.com';
const matchGrouping = urlGrouping.match(regexGroupConstructs);
console.log('Protocol:', matchGrouping[1]); // Expected output: 'https'
console.log('Subdomain:', matchGrouping[2]); // Expected output: 'www.'
console.log('Top-Level Domain:', matchGrouping[3]); //Expected output: 'example.com'
```

### Bracket Expressions

- `[...]` : The square brackets match specific sets of characters in the input string, providing for a flexible way to specify patterns for matching.

The below code snippet shows the specificity that is needed to match for the subdomain. It is seen in the `[]`

```javascript
const regexBracketExpressions = /^https?:\/\/[a-z0-44.-]+\.example\.com$/;
const urlBracketExpressions = 'https://test-12.example.com';
console.log(regexBracketExpressions.test(urlBracketExpressions)); // Expected output: true
```


### Character Classes

- `\d` : Matches any digit (0-9)
- `\w` : Matches any word charachter (alphanumneric characters plus underscore)
- `\.` : Matches a literal dot character
- `-` : Matches a hyphen character
- `\/` : Matches a forward slash character
- `[a-z]` : Matches any lowercase letter from a-z
- `[A-Z]` : Matches any uppercase letter from A-Z



```javascript
const regexCharacterClasses = /^https?:\/\/[\da-zA-Z]+\.[a-z]{2,6}$/;
const urlCharacterClasses = 'https://www.example.com'; 
console.log(regexCharacterClasses.test(urlCharacterClases)); // Expected output: true
```


### The OR Operator

- `|` : The OR operator, denoted by the vertical bar, serves to denote alternatives. It allows you to specify multiple options, where any one of them can match.


```javascript
const regexOROperator = /^(https?|http):\/\/www.example\.com$/
const urlOROperator = 'http://www.example.com'
console.log(regexOROperator.test(urlOROperator)) // Expected output: true

```


### Flags





### Character Escapes



## Author

Hi my name is Adrian Ponze. I am currently studying Full-stack Web Development and looking forward to apply my skills in a real world environment. I hope you found this breakdown of Regex helpful and straight to the point.

Check out my GitHub Profile here! [GitHub-Profile](https://github.com/Y1va/)

Commit message:

Added flags and character escapes

regex-tutorial.md, after:

# Regular Expression Breakdown

This tutorial/breakdown will be a clear and concise guide to regular expressions, commonly known as 'Regex'. Regex is an essential tool when dealing with processing text, As a fundamental resource, regex enables developers to retrieve, modify and manipulate data within strings.

This Gist serves as a straight to the point breakdown to explain the idea behind regex.

## Summary

The Regex that I will be using for my breakdown will be the following: `/^(https?:\/\/)?([\da-z\.-]+)\.([a-z\.]{2,6})([\/\w \.-]*)*\/?$/`

The above regex can be used to match with a URL, a couple example URL's that match with the regex provided are: https://www.example.com/path/to/resource | http://subdomain.domain.co.uk/page1/page2

Do note that each description of the components will contain a code snippet, this is to demonstrate how each specific regex component can match with specific URL's. I will also be providing a console log which uses the regex test method after each code snippet which shows a boolean value of true highlighting if there is a match.

## Table of Contents

- [Anchors](#anchors)
- [Quantifiers](#quantifiers)
- [Grouping Constructs](#grouping-constructs)
- [Bracket Expressions](#bracket-expressions)
- [Character Classes](#character-classes)
- [The OR Operator](#the-or-operator)
- [Flags](#flags)
- [Character Escapes](#character-escapes)

## Regex Components

### Anchors

- `^` : The caret anchor represents the start of a line
- `$` : The dollar sign represents the end of a line

The below code snippet shows the `^` at the start of the expression and the `$` at the end

```javascript
const regexAnchors = /^https?:\/\/example\.com$/;
const urlAnchors = 'https://example.com';
console.log(regexAnchors.test(urlAnchors)); // Expected output: true
```

### Quantifiers

- `?` : The question mark means 0 or 1 of the preceeding element. It makes the preceeding element optional.
- `+` : The plus sign indicates that the preceeding element can occur one or more times.
- `*` : The asterisk indicates that the preceeding element can occur 0 or more times

The below code snippet utilises the ?, +, and the \* Quantifiers, it also shows the string/URL that the regex matches with.

```javascript
const regexQuantifiers = /^https?:\/\/([\w-]+\.)+[\w]{2,}(\/[\w-./?%&=]*)?$/;
const urlQuantifiers =
  'https://www.example.com/path/to/resource?param1=value1&param2=value2';
console.log(regexQuantifiers.test(urlQuantifiers)); // Expected output: true
```


### Grouping Constructs

- `(...)` : The grouping constructs are defined by parenthesis and it denotes the beginning and end of a capturing group. These allow you to extract specific information from text efficiently.

The below code snippet shows 3 grouping constructs for the url https://www.example.com

```javascript
const regexGroupConstructs = /^(https?):\/\/(www\.)?(example\.com)$/;
const urlGrouping = 'https://www.example.com';
const matchGrouping = urlGrouping.match(regexGroupConstructs);
console.log('Protocol:', matchGrouping[1]); // Expected output: 'https'
console.log('Subdomain:', matchGrouping[2]); // Expected output: 'www.'
console.log('Top-Level Domain:', matchGrouping[3]); //Expected output: 'example.com'
```


### Bracket Expressions

- `[...]` : The square brackets match specific sets of characters in the input string, providing for a flexible way to specify patterns for matching.

The below code snippet shows the specificity that is needed to match for the subdomain. It is seen in the `[]`

```javascript
const regexBracketExpressions = /^https?:\/\/[a-z0-44.-]+\.example\.com$/;
const urlBracketExpressions = 'https://test-12.example.com';
console.log(regexBracketExpressions.test(urlBracketExpressions)); // Expected output: true
```


### Character Classes

- `\d` : Matches any digit (0-9)
- `\w` : Matches any word charachter (alphanumneric characters plus underscore)
- `\.` : Matches a literal dot character
- `-` : Matches a hyphen character
- `\/` : Matches a forward slash character
- `[a-z]` : Matches any lowercase letter from a-z
- `[A-Z]` : Matches any uppercase letter from A-Z



```javascript
const regexCharacterClasses = /^https?:\/\/[\da-zA-Z]+\.[a-z]{2,6}$/;
const urlCharacterClasses = 'https://www.example.com'; 
console.log(regexCharacterClasses.test(urlCharacterClases)); // Expected output: true
```


### The OR Operator

- `|` : The OR operator, denoted by the vertical bar, serves to denote alternatives. It allows you to specify multiple options, where any one of them can match.


```javascript
const regexOROperator = /^(https?|http):\/\/www.example\.com$/;
const urlOROperator = 'http://www.example.com';
console.log(regexOROperator.test(urlOROperator)) // Expected output: true
```


### Flags

- None: There are no flags specified at the end of this regex pattern.

The below code will be a demonstration of the `i` flag if it were in use.

The `i` flag is the case-insensitive flag, it makes the pattern match case-insensitively. By adding the bracket expressions, it allows for it to be more flexible.

```javascript
const regexFlags = /^https:\/\/[eE][xX][aA][mM][pP][lL][eE]\.com$/i;
const urlFlags = 'https://eXAmPle.com';
console.log(regexFlags.test(urlFlags)); // Expected output: true
```


### Character Escapes

- `\d` : Represents any digit (0-9)
- `\w` : Represents any word charachter (alphanumneric characters plus underscore)
- `\/` : Represents a forward slash character
- `\.` : Represents the dot character
- `\s` : Represents anywhitespace character (space, newline, etc.)


```javascript
const regexCharacterEscapes = /^https?:\/\/[\da-zA-Z]+\.[\w]{2,6}$/;
const urlCharacterEscapes = 'https://www.example.com';
console.log(regexCharacterEscapes.test(urlCharacterEscapes)); //Expected output: true
```


## Author

Hi my name is Adrian Ponze. I am currently studying Full-stack Web Development and looking forward to apply my skills in a real world environment. I hope you found this breakdown of Regex helpful and straight to the point.

Check out my GitHub Profile here! [GitHub-Profile](https://github.com/Y1va/)
